Home > Essays > The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting
The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting
“soft.”
Hardness and softness are things we meet because we’re alive. We all
have memories of the softness of handkerchiefs and the hardness of
softness belong to art; they also belong to physics, to ontology; and
All art tries to show hardness and softness working as one. I have said
that is, the soft. And out of the mistiness and suffusion and shadowed
constant interaction of hardness and softness; and if the interaction
Softness and hardness are in every aspect of art. A point itself, being
hardness and softness. Dots, another way of saying points, are severe
dots and suggestive dots: are hard dots and soft dots. Lines, when
curved, make for softness; when straight, hardness. A powerful line is
softness. It is quite clear that a circle is softer than an oblong
hard, and give them softness through their context in a picture; and
Color as to line, is as softness is to hardness. The making one of
reality as color and line is also the making one of reality as softness
Within colors, there are hardness and softness. The blending of colors
is really a blending of hard and soft effects or possibilities; of
nicely floating soft blue.
Volumes, quite clearly, have hardness and softness. A cube of bread
pairs comment on the meaning of softness and hardness.
Expression has in it, too, hardness and softness. This can best be seen
softness. Of course, body itself is.
The simple hardness and softness of physics, or of ordinary reality, is
soft, and hardness and softness, themselves are used.
criticism is that hardness unaccompanied by softness or flow makes for
unsuccessful art; and that softness unaccompanied by hardness or
related, brought out a flowingness or “softness” of relation among
rigidities. Surrealism, when watches were made soft, and typewriters
as soft and hard at once.
for a meaning that is soft, wide, and deeply lingering; Giotto, where
floating, soft mobility of Correggio, who, as an artist, still has his
softness in one way or another, in some effective and representative
Here Munro points to something “soft”—“grace of line”—in Mantegna and
is both hard and soft. This is clear in the following sentence: “The
are both hardness and softness in his work.
Then Munro says that later Venetian painting “softened” the lines of
flowingness, or softness as such. The following passage is about one of
the many, many dramas of hardness and softness which, in all kinds of
of light. Later Venetian painting softened such lines with richer
softness to Mantegna. The passage I have quoted contains a continuous
facing, mingling, and antagonism of “hard” and “soft” notions. The soft
is served by such words as receding, winding, scroll-work, softened,
softness; however, it may be said that light is harder than shadow.
is to softness.
Munro accents the softness in Constable (p. 13). The critic compares
The Constable is far more colorful, rich and luminous, with a soft
decorative color; but in merging all parts of his landscape by soft
soft. But the word whole with its clear unity is what brings the
softness.
Rembrandt: Hardness and Softness
hardness and softness to shade.) Munro’s work contains a critique (page
almost a bravura making one of hardness and softness. Munro, I think,
flowingness, hardness and softness one:
Rembrandt is akin to Leonardo da Vinci…in his reliance upon soft,
“Soft, mysterious shadows” as to “form” is, I think, as softness is to
softness are part of one artistic purpose, one artistic conclusion.
Said otherwise, what one might expect to be only hard or soft are both
statement implies that the relation of hardness and softness in
The continuous mystery of hard and soft, the grandeur in subtlety of
hardness and softness—as of light and dark—are felt with beautiful
softness in it is: “The face is stern, rugged, worn, but with a hint of
kindly softening in the lines about the eyes.”
seen by Rembrandt as at one with its resistance. The soft beard, for
Reality is hard and soft. The meaning of these two adjectives is
and that of the soft, and the permanent significance, are one. How
NOTE: “The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting” was printed in
