3 Classes of soft matter
Soft matter
For the journal, see Soft Matter (journal).
Soft matter
Soft matter or soft condensed matter is a type of matter that can be
The science of soft matter is a subfield of condensed matter physics.
Soft materials include liquids, colloids, polymers, foams, gels,
aspects are generally unimportant. When soft materials interact
soft matter, in particular, to the behaviors of liquid crystals and
The current understanding of soft matter grew from Albert Einstein's
significant impact on medicine, and were the inventors of the soft
across different forms of soft matter was key to understanding its
Interesting behaviors arise from soft matter in ways that cannot be
molecular constituents. Materials termed soft matter exhibit this
thermal or mechanical agitation, soft matter can undergo local
A defining characteristic of soft matter is the mesoscopic scale of
Typical bond energies in soft matter structures are of similar scale to
Self-assembly is an inherent characteristic of soft matter systems. The
the functional design of soft materials with these metastable states
Soft materials often exhibit both elasticity and viscous responses to
stress, is often used to investigate the bulk properties of soft
Classes of soft matter
Soft matter consists of a diverse range of interrelated systems and can
properties of soft matter, experimental work is primarily focused on
Computational methods are often employed to model and understand soft
soft matter due to their applicability to mapping systems at the
appropriate to all classes of soft matter and some systems may be more
Soft materials are important in a wide range of technological
applications, and each soft material can often be associated with
thermometers. Active liquid crystals are another example of soft
encompass a large range of soft matter, with applications in material
research insights from soft matter research have been applied to better
Historically the problems considered in the early days of soft matter
important application of soft matter research is biophysics, with a
soft matter characteristics are used to understand biologically
* Fracture of soft materials
1. ^ ^a ^b Kleman, Maurice; Lavrentovich, Oleg D., eds. (2003). Soft
3. ^ "Soft matter: more than words". Soft Matter. 1 (1): 16. 2005.
6. ^ Mezzenga, Raffaele (2021-12-22). "Grand Challenges in Soft
Matter". Frontiers in Soft Matter. 1: 811842.
7. ^ McLeish, Tom (2020). Soft Matter: a Very Short Introduction
Soft Matter Physics". Frontiers in Physics. 6: 87.
(2022), "Fracture in soft elastic materials: Continuum description,
20. ^ ^a ^b ^c ^d Jones, Richard A. L. (2002). Soft condensed matter.
21. ^ ^a ^b ^c Nagel, Sidney R. (2017-04-12). "Experimental soft-matter
John C.; Yodh, Arjun G. (2010-08-10). "Rheology of Soft Materials".
"Microscopic precursors of failure in soft matter". Soft Matter. 16
30. ^ Hamley, Ian W. (2003). "Nanotechnology with Soft Materials".
"Biological Soft Materials". Angewandte Chemie International
Versatile Self-Organized Smart Soft Materials". Chemical Reviews.
40. ^ ^a ^b ^c Brown, Michael F. (2017-05-22). "Soft Matter in
41. ^ ^a ^b Fusco, Diana; Charbonneau, Patrick (2016). "Soft matter
Manning, Matthew D.; Yingling, Yaroslava G. (2019). "Soft Matter
M.,  de, N. (2020), "Liquid-Phase Electron Microscopy for Soft
46. ^ Garcia, Ricardo (2020-08-17). "Nanomechanical mapping of soft
(2022-03-30). "3D Printing Soft Matters and Applications: A
* I. Hamley, Introduction to Soft Matter (2nd edition), J. Wiley,
* R. A. L. Jones, Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press,
* M. Kleman and O. D. Lavrentovich, Soft Matter Physics: An
* A. V. Zvelindovsky (editor), Nanostructured Soft Matter -
M. Daoud, C.E. Williams (editors), Soft Matter Physics, Springer
de Gennes, Pierre-Gilles, Soft Matter, Nobel Lecture, December 9,
Gang, Oleg, "Soft Matter and Biomaterials on the Nanoscale: The WSPC
Media related to Soft matter at Wikimedia Commons
* American Physical Society Topical Group on Soft Matter (GSOFT)
* Softbites - a blog run by graduate students and postdocs that makes
soft matter more accessible through bite-sized posts that summarize
current and classic soft matter research
soft condensed matter.
* Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Soft Matter Wiki
- organizes, reviews, and summarizes academic papers on soft
* Soft Matter Engineering - A group dedicated to Soft Matter
* Google Scholar page on soft matter
