#alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en) Wikipedia Atom feed

Jump to content

Main menu
Navigation

Contribute

Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia
Search
____________________




Pages for logged out editors learn more

Contents


2 Popularization in cultural criticism

3 Characterizing "Queen Anne" revival in architecture

4 Mundane pleasantry



5 Notes


Sweetness and light


Add links




Tools
Actions

General

Print/export

In other projects

Appearance
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
English Idiom
This article is about the English-language idiom. For the extended play
by Lush, see Sweetness and Light (EP). For the single by Itch-E and
Scratch-E, see Sweetness and Light (song).

Sweetness and light is an English idiom that can be used in common
speech, either as statement of personal happy consciousness, (though
this may be viewed by natives as being a trifle in earnest) or as
literal report on another person. Depending upon sense-of-humour, some
may use the phrase with mild irony. For example: The two had been
fighting for a month, but around others it was all sweetness and
often, sometimes with a slight nod to the phrase's dual-edge.
Originally, however, "sweetness and light" had a special use in
literary and cultural criticism meaning "pleasing and instructive",
which in classical theory was considered to be the aim and

Jonathan Swift first used the phrase in his mock-heroic prose satire,
"The Battle of the Books" (1704), a defense of Classical learning,
which he published as a prolegomenon to his A Tale of a Tub. It gained
widespread currency in the Victorian era, when English poet and
essayist Matthew Arnold picked it up as the title of the first section
of his 1869 book Culture and Anarchy: An Essay in Political and Social
Criticism, where "sweetness and light" stands for beauty and
intelligence, the two key components of an excellent culture.

Genesis


"The Battle of the Books" spoofed the famous seventeenth-century
Quarrel of the Ancients and the Moderns, a controversy that had raged
first in France and then, less intensely, in England, about which was
better, the Ancient or Modern learning. Should people model their
thinkings and creative productions on ancient Greek and Latin culture,
which had been rediscovered in Europe from the Renaissance on? Or
should they stay faithful to medieval modernity, scholasticism and the
authority of Christian monarchy and church; and create artistic works
in living vernacular languages (not Greek or Latin) that flatter
(1697), Swift's patron, the urbane Sir William Temple, had weighed in
on the side of the Ancients, repeating the famous figure of speech used
by Newton, that the moderns see further only because we are dwarves
standing on the shoulders of giants. Swift has the books come to life
and step down from the library shelves to stage a mock-Homeric battle,
while the goddess Criticism, a hideous hag, intervenes on the side of

Midway through the story, Aesop, an ancient book, stumbles on a debate
between a bee and a spider. The spider claims that the bee creates
nothing of its own, whereas the spider is an original creator who
"spins and spits wholly from himself, and scorns to own any obligation
or assistance from without"; his web is a triumph of architecture and
mathematics. The bee counters that the spider's web is spun from
digested flies and other dirt and that all the spider really
contributes is his poison. Bees range far and wide to search out the
very best flowers, which they do not harm, while the spider only moves

Aesop judges the argument. The ancient writers, he says, are like bees
who fill their "hives with honey and wax, thus furnishing mankind with
authors results in works filled with delight (sweetness) and moral
wisdom (light). Later writers, notably Matthew Arnold used the phrase
"sweetness and light", to designate the positive effects of a
(predominantly classical) humanistic culture in arts and letters
(without Swift's emphasis on originality versus imitation).

Popularization in cultural criticism


The Victorian poet and essayist Matthew Arnold, who was also an
inspector of schools, popularized Swift's phrase as the theme and title
of the first chapter of his celebrated book of cultural criticism,
Culture and Anarchy. Arnold contends that the most valuable aspect of
civilization is its ability to confer "sweetness and light," and he
contrasts this to the moralism, hatred, and fanaticism of some of the
would-be educators and materialistic improvers of mankind. For Arnold,
sweetness is beauty, and light is intelligence – and together they make
up "the essential character of human perfection," which had its fullest

Arnold criticizes the religious and utilitarian reformers of his own
day for wanting only to improve humanity's moral and material
condition, or for focusing "solely on the scientific passion for
knowing," while neglecting the human need for beauty and intelligence,
which comes about through lifelong self-cultivation. Arnold concedes
that the Greeks may have neglected the moral and material, but:

Greece did not err in having the idea of beauty and harmony and
complete human perfection so present and paramount; it is impossible
to have this idea too present and paramount; but the moral fiber
must be braced too. And we, because we have braced the moral fibre,
are not on that account in the right way, if at the same time the
idea of beauty, harmony, and complete human perfection is wanting or
misapprehended amongst us; and evidently it is wanting or
misapprehended at present. And when we rely as we do on our
religious organisations, which in themselves do not and cannot give
us this idea, and think we have done enough if we make them spread
and prevail, then, I say, we fall into our common fault of

The phrase came into regular use as an English language idiom after the
publication of Arnold's essay.

Characterizing "Queen Anne" revival in architecture


In 1977, architectural historian Mark Girouard used the title Sweetness
and Light: The "Queen Anne" Movement, 1860–1900, for his book
chronicling the comfortably eclectic architectural style of the
middle-class brick country houses that late-nineteenth-century British
artists and writers built for themselves. Here "sweetness and light"
implied that taste and beauty need not be restricted only to the
wealthy aristocracy but could benefit all classes of society.

Mundane pleasantry


During the 20th and 21st centuries, the phrase "sweetness and light"
has more typically been used, not in Arnold's sense, but more
mundanely, to indicate merely a friendly demeanor or a pleasant
situation. Bob's close friends knew he wasn't all sweetness and light.
is often used ironically to denote unexpected or insincere
pleasantness. The novel's tense moments are offset by long passages of
sweetness and light. Or: Fred was all sweetness and light around his

Notes

1. ^ ^a ^b ^c Christine Ammer, The American Heritage Dictionary of
Idioms (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997).
2. ^ English for dulce et utile (literally "sweet and useful") from
Horace's Ars Poetica (18 B.C.E.)
3. ^ Paddy Bullard, Alexis Tadié: Ancients and Moderns in Europe:
Comparative Perspectives, Voltaire Foundation, 2016.
4. ^ Burke, P., The Impact of Humanism on Western Europe, ed. A.
Goodman and A. MacKay, London, 1990, p. 2.
5. ^ Hause, S. & Maltby, W. (2001). A History of European Society.
Essentials of Western Civilization (Vol. 2, pp. 245–246). Belmont,
CA: Thomson Learning, Inc.
6. ^ The age-old comparison of artistic creation to the bee gathering
flowers derives from Seneca's Moral letters to Lucilius, No 84.
7. ^ Jonathan Swift, Gulliver's Travels, A Tale of a Tub, The Battle
of the Books (New York: Modern Library, 1931) pag. 532.
8. ^ Jonathan Swift, "The Battle of the Books", p. 532.
9. ^ "Indeed, the Greeks (albeit very selectively characterized) are
the unacknowledged heroes of Culture and Anarchy", Stefan Collini,
introduction to Culture and Anarchy and Other Writings (Cambridge
Texts in the History of Political Thought) by Matthew Arnold,
Stefan Collini, editor (Cambridge University Press, 1993) p. xx.
10. ^ Matthew Arnold, Culture & Anarchy, Jane Garner, ed. (Oxford World
Classics, 2004), p. 41.

Look up sweetness and light in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Retrieved from
207981783"
Category:

Hidden categories:
* Articles with short description
* Short description matches Wikidata

* This page was last edited on 16 February 2024, at 05:47 (UTC).
* Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a
registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a
non-profit organization.
