#Geo News - Entertainment



Geo News

Geo News

Geo News

X


Justin Bieber pays sweet tribute to wife Hailey Bieber on New Year's Eve

Justin Bieber showcases his wife Hailey Bieber posing in leopard-print coat
as a New Year's Eve sweet tribute

By
Web Desk
|

January 02, 2025
Justin Bieber pays sweet tribute to wife Hailey Bieber on New Years Eve
Justin Bieber pays sweet tribute to wife Hailey Bieber on New Year's
Eve

Justin Bieber marked the start of 2025 by sharing a heartfelt photo of
his wife, Hailey Bieber on his Instagram story.

On January 1, the singer posted a snap of Hailey posing in a bikini,
leopard-print coat, and Uggy boots.

Moreover, she accessorized her look with a “Happy New Year” headband
while smiling brightly on a staircase.

In regards to this, Justin captioned the image as, “Um. Going anywhere
with u bb. Happy New Year.”
Justin Bieber pays sweet tribute to wife Hailey Bieber on New Years Eve

Meanwhile, Hailey shared a series of pictures celebrating New Year’s
Eve, including more shots of her festive outfit.

The carousel also featured snaps from In-N-Out Burger, including a
caviar-topped burger as Hailey captioned the post as, “Wake up, it’s
2025!”

Additionally, the Rhode skincare founder also delighted fans by sharing
a glimpse of their baby son, Jack Blues Bieber.

While posting an Instagram Story of his tiny foot, she wrote, “HNY,”
accompanied by a paw print and smiley face emoji.

Furthermore, the couple welcomed Jack in August 2024 with Justin
announcing the news via Instagram as Justin wrote alongside a picture
of Hailey touching their newborn’s foot, “WELCOME HOME. JACK BLUES
BIEBER.”

According to Daily Mail, the pair have been embracing parenthood, as
“Hailey is over the moon and completely focused on being a mom.”

It is worth mentioning that US Weekly reported, “Justin is overjoyed
and very hands-on, prioritizing family above all else.”
facebook twitter whatsapp
* Meghan Markle told she cannot be ‘authentic' like Kardashians

Meghan Markle told she cannot be ‘authentic' like Kardashians
* Why does Justin Bieber 'need' the money?

Why does Justin Bieber 'need' the money?
* 'Moana 2' lands in 'hot waters' ahead of Oscars nom

'Moana 2' lands in 'hot waters' ahead of Oscars nom
* Meghan Markle, Prince Harry poor bond on camera decoded

Meghan Markle, Prince Harry poor bond on camera decoded

Jennifer Aniston airs plea for pets amid LA fires
Jennifer Aniston airs plea for pets amid LA fires
Reason Prince William went all out with birthday wish for Kate
Middleton video
Reason Prince William went all out with birthday wish for Kate
Middleton
Justin Bieber about to break the internet with his 2025 music return?
Justin Bieber about to break the internet with his 2025 music return?
Jennifer Lopez dating Kevin Costner to tease Ben Affleck, Garner:
Report
Jennifer Lopez dating Kevin Costner to tease Ben Affleck, Garner:
Report
'Blackpink's' Jennie makes shock confession about career struggles
'Blackpink's' Jennie makes shock confession about career struggles
Taylor Swift's record-breaking 'Eras Tour' misses out on the top 15
Taylor Swift's record-breaking 'Eras Tour' misses out on the top 15
Katie Price to undergo 'eye, butt' surgery after fixing 'pixie ears':
Source
Katie Price to undergo 'eye, butt' surgery after fixing 'pixie ears':
Source
Jennifer Lopez laser focused on Ben Affleck amid Kevin Costner romance
rumours?
Jennifer Lopez laser focused on Ben Affleck amid Kevin Costner romance
rumours?

Copyright © 2025. Geo Television Network. All Rights Reserved. |
Contact Us | Authors
