#alternate


Skip to content


+ Certificates of Deposit (CDs)
+ Best Money Market Accounts
+ Best 1-Year CD Rates
+ Best Jumbo CD Rates

Trade

+ Certificates of Deposit (CDs)
+ Best Money Market Accounts
+ Best 1-Year CD Rates
+ Best Jumbo CD Rates

Follow Us
*
*
*
*
*



Is an Economic ‘Soft Landing’ Coming to the U.S. in 2025?

By
Terry Lane
Terry Lane Terry Lane
Full Bio
*
*

Terry has 25 years experience in journalism and communications,
reporting on a range of topics that include personal finance,
telecommunications, Congress, government regulations, and criminal
justice. He has also worked on technology, energy, and environmental
policy issues as a congressional press secretary and owned and
published a local community newspaper in North Carolina.
Learn about our editorial policies
Published December 30, 2024
05:00 AM EST
*
*
*

A photo composite shows the Federal Reserve building with question
marks around it. A photo composite shows the Federal Reserve building
with question marks around it.

Investopedia / Photo Composite by Alice Morgan / Getty Images


Key Takeaways

* Some economists foresee a “soft landing” in 2025, with inflation
moving lower while the economy remains robust and unemployment
stays low.
* However, some predict a “no landing” scenario where the economy
remains strong but inflationary pressures remain high.
* While economists see a recession as unlikely, some said policy
changes like higher tariffs could weigh on economic growth.

Can price pressures return to normal in 2025 without a jump in
unemployment? If they do, it could mean the “soft landing” investors
and economists have been watching for.

For the past two years, the Federal Reserve has worked to tame
inflation and cool down the economy without tipping it into a
recession. While the central bank didn't reach its annual goal of 2%
inflation in 2024, it did keep a lid on unemployment, and the economy
continued its growth. Some economists remain hopeful a soft landing
could arrive in the new year.

“We continue to believe that we're in this soft landing phase where
U.S. economic growth remains resilient through 2025,” said Ashish Shah,
chief investment officer of public investing at Goldman Sachs Asset
Management.

Tracking the Chance of a Soft Landing

Economists look at inflation, the labor market, gross domestic product
(GDP) and other economic indicators when watching for a soft landing.

According to calculations by Wells Fargo, the probability of a soft
landing increased two percentage points from their last estimate to 42%
when taking into account third-quarter data. Meanwhile, the probability
of a recession decreased by the same amount, to 28%.

Their research also examined another possibility: stagflation, in which
inflation rises along with the unemployment rate. The probability of
that scenario was lower than the odds of a recession.

Inflation Still Needs to Fall. What If It Doesn't?

The Federal Reserve needs price pressures to slow in 2025 to achieve a
soft landing. Some forecasts indicate that the risk of inflation from
President-elect Donald Trump's policies could exacerbate already
stubborn inflation.

“Tariffs stand to throw some sand in the gears of economic growth next
year and stymie inflation's return to the Federal Reserve's target,”
said a Wells Fargo note from a group of analysts headed by Chief
Economist Jay Bryson.

In addition to stubborn inflation, many economists think economic
growth will remain strong, the Federal Reserve will keep interest rates
elevated, and tariffs are likely to raise prices. That could create a
situation in which there's no landing at all.

“Instead of landing, the U.S. economy may simply refuel next year,”
wrote Sal Guatieri, senior economist at BMO.

What About a Recession?

A soft landing would be a rarity for the Federal Reserve. Out of the
last nine times the Fed raised rates, a recession ensued after eight,
according to analysis by Piper Sandler. However, this time, a recession
is not an outcome that most economists think is likely.

“Our suite of recession models showed the lowest probability of
recession at the three- and six-month horizons in more than two years,”
wrote Matthew Martin, senior U.S. economist at Oxford Economics.

However, uncertainty around the economy, especially over the impact of
tariffs, could mean that economic growth comes in lower than expected.

“A hard landing, or recession, is not our base case, but the risk of
such a scenario would rise in the event of severe disruptions to global
trade,” wrote Wells Fargo.
Do you have a news tip for Investopedia reporters? Please email us at
tips@investopedia.com

Article Sources
Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their
work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting,
and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original
research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can
learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate,
unbiased content in our editorial policy.
1. Wells Fargo. “Soft-Landing, or No Soft-Landing, That is the
Question.”
2. Wells Fargo. “2025 Annual Outlook.”
3. Piper Sandler. "How Likely is a Soft Landing? A Look At History
Since the 1960s."

Take the Next Step to Invest
×
The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which
Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how
and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers
available in the marketplace.

Related Articles
A man uses a credit card at the Pike Place Market in Seattle. A man
uses a credit card at the Pike Place Market in Seattle.
Majority of Americans Still Wary About Economic Prosperity in
2025—Here's Why
Amazon employees work to fulfill same-day orders during Cyber Monday,
one of the company's busiest days at an Amazon fulfillment center on
December 2, 2024 in Orlando, Florida. Amazon employees work to fulfill
same-day orders during Cyber Monday, one of the company's busiest days
at an Amazon fulfillment center on December 2, 2024 in Orlando,
Florida.
What to Expect from the December Jobs Report
Los Angeles, California November 27, 2024-Holiday traffic clogs the 110
Freeway as commuters leave before the Thanksgiving weekend in Downtown
Los Angeles. Los Angeles, California November 27, 2024-Holiday traffic
clogs the 110 Freeway as commuters leave before the Thanksgiving
weekend in Downtown Los Angeles.
Will the Economy Continue Its Growth in 2025?
Food bank warehouse worker Tammie Racine stocks fresh farm produce
collected through the "Harvest for All" donation program. Food bank
warehouse worker Tammie Racine stocks fresh farm produce collected
through the
Top Industries Where Pay Is Outpacing Inflation—And Where It's Not
Healthcare workers in a hospital Healthcare workers in a hospital
Hiring Surprisingly Surged In December
A customer is seen during shopping at a supermarket as packages of eggs
are seen on the shelves of the egg aisle in New York City A customer is
seen during shopping at a supermarket as packages of eggs are seen on
the shelves of the egg aisle in New York City
Will Inflation Continue to Decline in 2025?
Partner Links
Related Terms
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA): Overview and History
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) is a US law to protect workers
against certain unfair pay practices.
more
The Sahm Rule Recession Indicator Definition and How It's Calculated
The Sahm Rule is a recession indicator based on labor market
conditions. Read more about how it's calculated, how it signals that
the economy is in a recession, its origin and more.
more
Soft Landing: Definition and History in Economics
A soft landing, in economics, is a cyclical slowdown that comes to an
end without a recession phase.
more
What Is the Unemployment Rate?
The unemployment rate is the percentage of the total unemployed labor
force actively seeking employment and willing to work.
more
Applied Economics: Definition, How It Works, and How It's Used
Applied economics refers to the use of economy-framed theories,
combined with data and information, to improve real world outcomes.
more
What Is Net Neutrality? Policies and Controversy
Net neutrality is a policy that requires internet service providers
(ISPs) to provide equal access to the internet, with no changes in
speed. In the U.S., it was struck down by a federal appeals court in
January 2025.
more

*
*
*
*

TRUSTe


Investopedia is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.

By clicking “Accept All Cookies”, you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and
assist in our marketing efforts.
