* Skip to main content

Aesthetic Realism Online Library

Search this website Search______________ Search
Home > Essays > The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting
Search this website Search this website_ Submit

The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting

By Eli Siegel

This essay was written in 1953.

I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you as gently as any
sucking dove; I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.

—A Midsummer Night’s Dream

Piero della Francesca and Jean Baptiste Camille Corot are, at this
moment, both of art: their work is true to art. The immediate effect,
however, of a painting by the fifteenth-century Italian is different
from that of the nineteenth-century Frenchman. One could be critically
elaborate about the verticals, the restraint, the severity, the
containment of, say, The Baptism of Christ; and critically elaborate
about the curves, the gentle blendings, the diffusiveness, the
suggestion in placidity of, say, Corot’s Mantes. Somewhere, a careful
critical evaluation of the qualities and artistic procedures in the
work of Piero della Francesca would meet and go along with the first,
simple feeling that it was “hard”; and somewhere such an evaluation of
the painting by Corot would go along with the feeling that it was
“soft.”

Hardness and softness are things we meet because we’re alive. We all
have memories of the softness of handkerchiefs and the hardness of
tables; and we can renew these memories any hour. Even as we think of a
four inch cube of steel and a pulsating pigeon, we are having
different—though related—experiences. The ideas of hardness and
softness belong to art; they also belong to physics, to ontology; and
to the commonest happening of the commonest hour.

All art tries to show hardness and softness working as one. I have said
that the immediate effect of a painting by Piero della Francesca is
that of hardness; but Piero, being an artist, uses his severe visual
presentations to get to the suggestive, the haunting, even the melting:
that is, the soft. And out of the mistiness and suffusion and shadowed
roundnesses of Corot, emerges something of form, something stable,
definite, self-contained: that is, the hard. We, ourselves, are a
constant interaction of hardness and softness; and if the interaction
is not so accurate, we are in a state of misfortune.

In Every Aspect of Art

Softness and hardness are in every aspect of art. A point itself, being
both sharp and a circle—so it has to be, visually—is a presence of
hardness and softness. Dots, another way of saying points, are severe
dots and suggestive dots: are hard dots and soft dots. Lines, when
curved, make for softness; when straight, hardness. A powerful line is
both wavering and assertive. Planes maintain the drama of hardness and
softness. It is quite clear that a circle is softer than an oblong
tipped at an angle. It may be mentioned here that one of the things
Vuillard does is to take planes, most often thought of as angular or
hard, and give them softness through their context in a picture; and
through color.

Color as to line, is as softness is to hardness. The making one of
reality as color and line is also the making one of reality as softness
and hardness. Every painting, according to Aesthetic Realism, is an
exploration of ontological possibility. When a painting succeeds,
reality is once more shown in its newness, contrariness, diversity—yet
as inevitable, orderly, one.

Within colors, there are hardness and softness. The blending of colors
is really a blending of hard and soft effects or possibilities; of
arrest and continuity. And we all of us can feel a rigid brown or a
nicely floating soft blue.

Volumes, quite clearly, have hardness and softness. A cube of bread
does something dramatically other than a cube of steel, colored brown.
Pliability and rigidity are dramatic in physics: and they are in art.

Composition, itself, is a presence and interaction of flow and
precision, diversity and oneness, expansion and fixity—all of which
pairs comment on the meaning of softness and hardness.

Expression has in it, too, hardness and softness. This can best be seen
in portraiture. The face is a constant presentation of hardness and
softness. Of course, body itself is.

The simple hardness and softness of physics, or of ordinary reality, is
to be seen in the full implication of words, phrases, and sentences
used in the history of art criticism. Of course, the terms hard and
soft, and hardness and softness, themselves are used.

One of the things we can gather from the history of art and art
criticism is that hardness unaccompanied by softness or flow makes for
unsuccessful art; and that softness unaccompanied by hardness or
definition likewise makes for unsuccessful art.

Cubism and Surrealism

Cubism, in its use of geometrical figures, accurately and intensely
related, brought out a flowingness or “softness” of relation among
rigidities. Surrealism, when watches were made soft, and typewriters
mingled with viscera, likewise attempted to present objects or reality
as soft and hard at once.

Primitive painting, most often, uses “hard” immediate effects to make
for a meaning that is soft, wide, and deeply lingering; Giotto, where
he can be seen as “primitive,” is a most meaningful contrast to the
floating, soft mobility of Correggio, who, as an artist, still has his
definition or hardness.

It would be interesting, I think, to note the presence of hardness and
softness in one way or another, in some effective and representative
criticism of our time. I believe it would be useful to employ Thomas
Munro’s Great Pictures of Europe (1930) as a source for our inquiry.

Munro (page 178) points out the hardness of Venetian art before
Bellini. He writes:

Alvise Vivarini, Madonna and Saints—stiff, cramped, wooden,
sharp-edged figures, basically sculptural; they show the state of
Venetian art before Bellini. Mantegna, St. George—small but
concentrated in lustre and grace of line.

Here Munro points to something “soft”—“grace of line”—in Mantegna and
to something “hard”—“stiff, cramped, wooden, sharp-edged figures”—in
Vivarini.

However, elsewhere in his work, Munro comments on Mantegna’s Calvary.
Here we find that Mantegna has something more than “grace of line”; he
is both hard and soft. This is clear in the following sentence: “The
distinctive element here is the use of long, sharp, flowing lines.” The
fact that Mantegna’s lines are both sharp and flowing shows that there
are both hardness and softness in his work.

One of the Many Dramas

Then Munro says that later Venetian painting “softened” the lines of
Mantegna. We have seen that Mantegna did not avoid grace, or
flowingness, or softness as such. The following passage is about one of
the many, many dramas of hardness and softness which, in all kinds of
combinations, we find in the history of art:

Their basic structure is firm: tall verticals against intersecting,
receding diagonals. Over them the small details engrave a winding
scroll-work of unnatural clarity, emphasized by long linear streaks
of light. Later Venetian painting softened such lines with richer
color and melted them into plainer masses. The direct effect on the
eye is somewhat edgy, acrid, cramped, ungrateful. But such qualities
are more consistent with the pain, the agony and pity represented
than are the suavity and sensuous richness found in later treatments
of the same subject.

So just as Mantegna added grace to Vivarini, later Venetians added
softness to Mantegna. The passage I have quoted contains a continuous
facing, mingling, and antagonism of “hard” and “soft” notions. The soft
is served by such words as receding, winding, scroll-work, softened,
color, melted, suavity, sensuous, richness; the hard by such words as
structure, form, tall, verticals, intersecting, diagonals, linear,
edgy, acrid, cramped. A word like light is of both hardness and
softness; however, it may be said that light is harder than shadow.
Then there is the word clarity: clarity to unclearness is as hardness
is to softness.

Munro accents the softness in Constable (p. 13). The critic compares
Constable’s Haywain to Hobbema’s Woody Landscape:

The Constable is far more colorful, rich and luminous, with a soft
iridescence that seems to penetrate deep into the inner substance of
trees, grass and soil.

Further, Munro writes:

He is not interested in brilliant, direct sunlight, or in bright
decorative color; but in merging all parts of his landscape by soft
transitions into one deep, continuous whole.

In this last passage, the relation of deep to continuous is as hard to
soft. But the word whole with its clear unity is what brings the
necessary hardness or definition to Constable’s grace, luminosity,
softness.

Rembrandt: Hardness and Softness

Rembrandt has been long seen as the sober, enchanting master of light
and shade. (As I have said, in reality, as in art, light corresponds to
hardness and softness to shade.) Munro’s work contains a critique (page
246) of Rembrandt’s The Man with the Gold Helmet, which is a striking,
almost a bravura making one of hardness and softness. Munro, I think,
is saying in the following passages that Rembrandt made rigidity and
flowingness, hardness and softness one:

Rembrandt is akin to Leonardo da Vinci…in his reliance upon soft,
mysterious shadows as the basis of his form.

“Soft, mysterious shadows” as to “form” is, I think, as softness is to
hardness. In other words, Rembrandt has shown that hardness and
softness are part of one artistic purpose, one artistic conclusion.

The shadows are never drab and dead, the modelling never hard and
sculptural, the transitions from dark to light never flashily
theatrical—all faults common in Leonardo.

Said otherwise, what one might expect to be only hard or soft are both
in a rich manner: the shadows move, are not “dead,” even while they are
clearly shadows; the modelling, while being undoubtedly modelling, is
never “hard and sculptural”; the transitions from dark to light, while
definitely transitions, are never “flashily theatrical.” Munro’s
statement implies that the relation of hardness and softness in
Rembrandt’s painting is rich and continuous, as that of dancers
gracefully taking each other’s places in a dance around the Maypole.
The continuous mystery of hard and soft, the grandeur in subtlety of
hardness and softness—as of light and dark—are felt with beautiful
justice by Rembrandt.

Another passage of Munro with the friendly opposition of hardness and
softness in it is: “The face is stern, rugged, worn, but with a hint of
kindly softening in the lines about the eyes.”

However, the whole comment of Munro is concerned with how in a picture
of a soldier with a gold helmet the yieldingness of the world has been
seen by Rembrandt as at one with its resistance. The soft beard, for
example, merges with the hard helmet. Something like this is going on
everywhere in the painting. And Rembrandt’s purpose and technique are
reflected in the critic’s words.

Reality is hard and soft. The meaning of these two adjectives is
endless. They are like matter and space; they are like rest and motion;
death and life. Art shows that the immediate significance of the hard
and that of the soft, and the permanent significance, are one. How
lovely this is, how important this is, I think we have yet to know.

Copyright © 1953 by Eli Siegel; 2012 by Aesthetic Realism Foundation
NOTE: “The Drama of Hardness and Softness in Painting” was printed in
The Right of Aesthetic Realism to Be Known, Number 846, June 21, 1989.
This issue was reprinted in 2012.

Stay in touch

Receive email alerts for each new issue of The Right Of, and
announcements of events at the Aesthetic Realism Foundation.
Subscribe

Follow us:

Contact Us Support Our Work

Aesthetic Realism Foundation
141 Greene Street
New York, NY 10012
tel 212.777.4490

Copyright © 1997-2025 Aesthetic Realism Foundation

MENU
+ Poems by Eli Siegel
o Short Poems
o Civil War Poems
+ Poets: Their Lives & Works
+ What Poetry Really Is
+ A Celebration of Poetry
+ Poetry of Martha Baird
+ The Economy & Ethics
+ Love & the Family
+ More Issues of Our Time
* The Eli Siegel Collection
