#Notes on Metamodernism » Feed Notes on Metamodernism » Comments Feed
JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

Skip to content

Notes on Metamodernism

Search for: ____________________ (Search)

Hard and soft

Art, Literature / By Timotheus Vermeulen / March 16, 2011 September 28,
2012

Metamodernism is above all about oscillation. Or at least for me it is.
It is about the oscillation between the modern and the postmodern,
history and ahistoricity, optimism and pessimism, sincerity and irony,
the concept and the material, the figurative and the formless,
narrative and the plotless, discursive originality and individual
intertextuality, meaning and meaninglessness. (To be sure, contrary to
what the above might suggest, it is not so much about the oscillation
between binary opposites, as between the various ends on a
multidimensional continuum of energies and intensities.)

One oscillation that has become particularly poignant of late is the
oscillation between what might perhaps best be called ‘hardness’ and
‘softness’. Hardness here means a social ruthlessness and austerity as
well as a physical firmness. Softness similarly can intend both
sensitivity or empathy and the smoothness, silkiness or furriness of a
substance. In what follows, I briefly explore (and it is a tentative
exploration really, an attempt to come to grips with) two exemplary
practices.

The brilliant writing of Roberto Bolano is illustrative of the
oscillation between hardness and softness. Bolano’s style is frequently
epic and evocative, replete with grand gestures and long sentences, but
it is also often (and unfortunately I can speak about the English
translation only here) staccato, a stop-motion stream of hurried and
barely finished sentences and interrupted thoughts. Indeed, novels like
2066 and The savage detectives create a narrative fabric, it seems,
only to write into the non-narrative gaps (plot lines without diegetic
past or future). Similarly, if the worlds Bolano narrates are
frequently terrible and terrifying, a labyrinthic, grim and murky
setting for dispassionate murders, calculated violence and harsh words,
the vagrants, poets and students that occupy it repeatedly manage to
establish impossible, severely flawed yet sincere and heartfelt, but
mostly just extremely human, connections.

Another striking example is the work of the French artist Cyprien
Gaillard. His various videos, installations, collages and paintings all
concern themselves with the tension between modernist architecture and
nature, between Reason and ruins. His most obviously Romantic piece
Belief in the Age of Disbelief (2005) situates a modernist housing
block amidst an idyllic 17^th century Dutch landscape (not entirely
dissimilar indeed to the works of Peter Doig and David Thorpe I
discussed earlier). The hard, straight vertical and horizontal lines of
the housing block contrast with the softer, curved, undulated lines of
the trees and the hilltops; its homogenous anonymity with the nature’s
inviting diversity. Yet surprisingly, the housing block does not
suppress nature, but appears to be subsumed by it; instead of
symbolizing a future of Reason, it comes to represent a ruin from an
incomprehensible, mythical past.


In his more recent, (in)famous Desniansky Raion (2008), the tension
between modernism and nature, Reason and ruins, but also between
hardness and softness paradoxically becomes both unbearably manifest
and evasively mythical. In a series of videos, Gaillard monumentalizes
modernist architecture across a number of European cities. In the first
video, modernist buildings outside of St. Petersburg become the boxing
ring for massive, orchestrated yet completely irrational and harrowing
fistfights between local fight clubs (evoking 18^th century battles
between neighbouring towns). In the second section, a Paris housing
block in the process of demolition becomes the stage for an estranging,
otherworldly light show (tellingly, an artistic practice usually
reserved for castles, ruins and monuments). And in the third part, an
Ukrainian estate comprised of high, anonymous flats, is turned into a
modern Stonehenge: a choreography of closed, silent witnesses of a past
whose laws, rules, norms and values have become incomprehensible to us.

For that is what Gaillard’s work is about: by pairing the modernist
architecture with transcendence, sensuality and aggression, that is, by
coupling the hard, cold and calculated to the indeterminable and
fluent, Reason to the irrational, the past future to the future past,
he tries to write a hauntology, that is, tries to inscribe the inhuman
into the annals of human myth (however horrible that myth may be).

In Bolano as well as Gaillard’s work (or Djurberg, or even Eliasson, or
P.T. Anderson, or The Wire) the unbearably hardness is, impossibly, at
the same time the sought-after softness. A (post)modern world of failed
utopias, missed chances and cynical deconstruction is represented as a
horrendous, terrible place; but a place,  still, a lived space of
relationships and history, where one can begin to try and live again.

Image: Cyprien Gaillard, Belief in the Age of Disbelief (2005).
Courtesy Laura Bartlett Gallery.

Post navigation

← Previous Post
Next Post →

Copyright © 2025 Notes on Metamodernism

web analytics
