#3 Soft Skills To Learn In 2025 That Will Pay You Forever - RSS

Subscribe To Newsletters

BETA
THIS IS A BETA EXPERIENCE. OPT-OUT HERE

More From Forbes

Jan 11, 2025,09:27am EST
Gen Z Colleagues Are Annoyed By You—Probably—For 4 Reasons
Jan 10, 2025,06:22pm EST
How Employers Can Reduce The ‘January Resignation Rush Trend’ In 2025
Jan 10, 2025,04:41pm EST
5 Benefits Of A Competitive Mindset At Work
Jan 10, 2025,04:00pm EST
The JPMorgan Memo Ends Remote Work And Tells Employees To Return To
Office
Jan 10, 2025,03:45pm EST
Tariff Troubles? World’s Largest EV Battery Maker Blacklisted In USA
Jan 10, 2025,01:02pm EST
Companies See The Importance Of Pay Transparency. But They’re Lagging
Jan 10, 2025,12:07pm EST
Activist Investors Forced Record Number Of CEOs To Resign In 2024
Jan 10, 2025,12:00pm EST
Top 10 Industries Hiring Remote Jobs In 2025, From Research
Jan 10, 2025,10:45am EST
U.S. Job Growth Excels But These Companies Are Announcing Layoffs

Edit Story
ForbesLeadershipCareers

3 Soft Skills To Learn In 2025 That Will Pay You Forever

Rachel Wells
Contributor
Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
Rachel Wells is a writer who covers freelancing, AI, and remote work.
Following
Dec 30, 2024,10:56am EST

Soft skills are timeless career assets that open doors which technical
getty

Soft skills are timeless assets that every professional needs to
develop and grow their career. As workplaces continue to evolve with
digital transformation, AI implementation, and structured hybrid remote
work models, as well as increased demand for certain skill sets and
role types, it becomes more of a necessity for you to master skills
that will ensure long-term career success and stability.

The incredible thing about soft skills is that they're not only
transferable across industries and transcend roles, but they are also
high-income skills, meaning that they are the gateway to high-paying
career and business opportunities.

You could easily have strong technical skills and the know-how to
perform your job role well, but, as numerous studies and the experience
of employers hiring Gen Z graduates has proven, without soft skills
your technical knowledge will be worthless and bar you from more
opportunities. What's worse, you might not even continue in your
current job at all, making it difficult for you to make any progress up
the career ladder.

3 Soft Skills That Pay Well In 2025

The three soft skills listed in this article are imperative to your
career success, and you can take advantage of the resources (books,
podcasts, courses, etc.) that are listed to help you develop these
skills so you can experience a highly fulfilling career:

1. Emotional Intelligence (EQ)

Emotional intelligence is perhaps the most essential soft skill you
could ever have. Having a high EQ equates to having a growth mindset
(always reflecting on your progress and actively seeking ways to
improve yourself), being able to manage your own emotions, and also
empathizing and connecting with others.
MORE FOR YOU

Google Starts Tracking All Your Devices In 6 Weeks—Forget Chrome And Android

California Wildfire Live Updates: Death Toll Rises To 11 As Palisades Fire
Expands East

Apple Brings Back iPhone 15 Pro For First Time—At Lower Price

This soft skill forms the foundation of relationship-building and is
especially helpful for roles in which you have a high level of
engagement with people, such as sales, real estate, senior leadership,
and project management and middle management roles. Having emotional
intelligence as a soft skill improves team dynamics and enables you to
resolve conflicts in the workplace while building trust and improving
collaboration.

Where to learn it:
* Book: Emotional Intelligence, by Daniel Goleman; also try a newly
published book, "Emotional Intelligence: The Art of Mastering
Emotions and Building Resilient Relationships," by Emily Lans
* Course: Emotional and Social Intelligence, by the University of
California Davis, via Coursera (part of the Professional Skills For
The Workplace Specialization)

2. Resilience Skills

The next important soft skill is resilience. Resilience is necessary to
overcome and recover from setbacks at work and in your career. Over the
course of your career journey, you'll likely encounter several
obstacles in many different forms, such as a failed business pitch, job
rejections, a working relationship that's not working out so well
between you and your employer, or being told no several times when
seeking a promotion or other advanced career opportunity.

Having resilience will enable you to maintain focus in the face of
these setbacks, and it'll guide you towards achieving your goals in
spite of it all, ultimately leading to a lifetime of career success.

Where to learn it:
* Book: Resilient: How to Grow an Unshakable Core of Calm, Strength,
and Happiness by Dr. Rick Hanson
* Course: Positive Psychology, Resilience Skills by the University of
Pennsylvania via Coursera

3. Networking Skills

You've probably heard of the saying that goes, "Your network is your
net worth." Networking skills opens up doors that you probably never
deemed existed. You'll be able to find invaluable mentorship/mentee
opportunities so you can contribute meaningfully to someone else's
career while growing your own, and you'll also have opportunities for
strategic business partnerships and collaborations.

But to network effectively, you need two essential sets of skills:
relationship-building and communication skills (emotional intelligence
is part of this), and the ability to select the right people to be part
of your inner circle.

This is because you'll end up wasting your time using your
relationship-building skills on people who cannot make an ounce of
difference to your career, but are simply time-wasters. You want to
concentrate on finding the right people—decision-makers, recruiters,
key contacts, inspirational professionals and leading voices in your
industry—and spending time cultivating connections with them, because
these are the ones who you'll have a mutually beneficial relationship
with.

Where to learn it:
* Book: Find Your People: Building Deep Community in a Lonely World
by Jennie Allen
* Course: How to Network: Leading Yourself to Lead Others, by the
University of Michigan, via Coursera

Strategically choose who you include in your inner circle, as these
will impact your career success
getty

With a high EQ, resilience, and networking skills, there's no limit to
how successful your career can be. These three soft skills will take
you far in life and enable you to be a star in your industry, so why
not commit to start developing them this new year?
Follow me on Twitter or LinkedIn. Check out my website.
Rachel Wells
Rachel Wells
Following


Join The Conversation

Comments

One Community. Many Voices. Create a free account to share your
thoughts.

Forbes Community Guidelines

Our community is about connecting people through open and thoughtful
conversations. We want our readers to share their views and exchange
ideas and facts in a safe space.

In order to do so, please follow the posting rules in our site's Terms
of Service.  We've summarized some of those key rules below. Simply
put, keep it civil.

Your post will be rejected if we notice that it seems to contain:
* False or intentionally out-of-context or misleading information
* Insults, profanity, incoherent, obscene or inflammatory language or
threats of any kind
* Attacks on the identity of other commenters or the article's author
* Content that otherwise violates our site's terms.

User accounts will be blocked if we notice or believe that users are
engaged in:
* Continuous attempts to re-post comments that have been previously
moderated/rejected
* Racist, sexist, homophobic or other discriminatory comments
* Attempts or tactics that put the site security at risk
* Actions that otherwise violate our site's terms.

So, how can you be a power user?
* Stay on topic and share your insights
* Feel free to be clear and thoughtful to get your point across
* ‘Like’ or ‘Dislike’ to show your point of view.
* Use the report tool to alert us when someone breaks the rules.

Thanks for reading our community guidelines. Please read the full list
of posting rules found in our site's Terms of Service.
